Coordinate Conversion in MapInfo - HOWTO
by Bill Thoen
Jan, 2003


You can easily transform a set of coordinates from one coordinate 
system to another with MapInfo. Let's assume you're starting with a 
table containing just a list of Latitude/Longitude coordinates. If 
you're starting with a table that has point objects already, you can 
skip the "Create Points" step.

Table Structure Modification

Use the Table/Maintenance/Table Structure menu option. Then modify 
the table's structure and add two more attributes: X_Coord and 
Y_Coord. You can name them anything you wish, but they should be of 
type "Float" to preserve as much precision as possible. You also 
need to make the table mappable, so mark the "Table is mappable" 
checkbox if it's not already marked.

Create Points

If your table does not yet contain any point objects, these you must 
create them from the coordinates already in your table. Choose the 
Table/Create Points menu option. On the Create Points dialog, choose 
appropriate values for point symbol, X and Y columns (remembering 
that X is longitude and Y is Latitude). If your coordinates are not 
latitude and longitude values, then also be sure to click on the 
Projection button and set the correct coordinate system to match 
your coordinates. Then press OK and create your points.

Converting Coordinate Values

Now we're ready to perform the coordinate conversion. The first step 
is to set MapInfo's internal coordinate system to what we want for 
our output coordinates. To do this, we will need to enter the 
correct "Set Coordsys..." command into the MapBasic window, so open 
the MapBasic window (use Options/Show MapBasic window.) Then open 
the map window containing your points. Choose Map/Options and on the 
Map Options dialog, click the Projection button and set the 
coordinate system to the one desired. When you press OK a long 
complicated command will appear in the MapBasic window.

Now go the MapBasic window and remove all the words in that command 
between "Set" and "Coordsys" leaving just a space between these 
words. With the cursor anywhere on that line, press Enter. Nothing 
will appear to have changed, but don't worry about that; MapInfo's 
internal coordinate system has just been changed.

Next, choose the Table/update column menu option. Make sure the 
table to update is the one into which you want to write your output 
coordinates. Set "Column to update" to your X_Coord column; "Get 
value from table" should be the same table; and for Value, click the 
Assist button and from the Functions drop-down pick 
"CentroidX(obj)." Then click OK and your X values will be output. Do 
the same for Y_Coord (using the function value CentroidY(obj) this 
time) and you should now have a set of converted coordinates in your 
output columns.


